This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. In addition to being an author, Terry Carr
is one of science fiction's premier editors. We asked him how he got hooked on
science fiction back in the late 1940s.
We'd go down and look around to see what people were throwing out. And one day,
among the things we found people had thrown out were a couple of old pulp
magazines from the year before. Amazing Stories. And I think there was one
Amazing Stories and one Fantastic Adventures, those being companion magazines.
We grabbed those and brought them home. And I loved them. I got hooked right
there. After publishing a couple early novels and some short stories, Carr began
his editing career at Ace Books. We asked him if he could tell us exactly what
he did for Ace. Yeah. In 1964, I went to work for Ace Books as an editorial
assistant, which actually meant that I was low man
on the totem pole there. I was simply somebody who copyedited manuscripts, went
over them to make sure the spelling was correct and things like that. There were
no typographical errors.
And proofread the books before they actually got published to make sure, once
again, that there were no typographical errors in the typesetting. I would write
blurbs, cover copies, kind of, you know, the things that are written on the
front and back covers of paperback books to try to get you to be interested
enough in the book to buy it. And at the same time, I was reading a number of
submissions that were coming in. And if I saw something good, I would pass it on
to the editor. It was Donald Wollheim.
Carr says he then began to make suggestions for improving and expanding the Ace
line of science fiction books. And he worked his way up in the company. Ace
Books then did start doing a number of the things that I had suggested. So that
I began getting this and that promotion. And I think after about the first three
years, I became a senior editor there.
And began a series called the Ace Science Fiction Specials, which was very much
a departure for Ace Books in particular, but for the entire field for that
matter, because it was specifically designed to publish adult science fiction
novels, not simply juvenile adventure, but serious novels using the science
fiction genre as its format, and packaged uniformly so that people would be able
to recognize a new book in the series when it came out, and packaged in such a
way that, you know, it didn't have monsters chasing half-naked women on the
covers. We had very good artwork by a team of artists called Leo and Diane
Dillon, who later won a Hugo Award and won two Caldecott Awards. God knows what
else. They are extremely good artists. I also began anthologizing very early
when I started there. Don Wollheim and I were collaborating on an anthology, an
annual anthology, called World's Best Science Fiction. And I gradually branched
out from that since I had begun to have my name on anthologies. I began to do
all this for Doubleday and Fawcett Books and so on. And that was actually how I
got my start doing anthologies, was the work that I was doing in Ace Books. Some
of the anthologies Carr does include the Annual Universe series of Original
Science Fiction, which he originated in 1971, and the Best Science Fiction of
the Year series, which he began in 1972. We'll talk to Terry Carr next time
about what it's like to edit anthologies of science fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lane.
Each year, Terry Carr edits two of the best known anthologies in science fiction.
One is the Universe series, begun in 1971, which is an anthology of original science fiction.
We ask Carr the difference to an author between selling his story to a monthly science fiction magazine or selling it to an anthology like universe.
There are all sorts of differences.
They're both artistic and monetary differences.
For one thing, if you sell to a magazine, then the money that you get from the magazine is simply the payment for that use of the story.
If you sell it to an original anthology, that's going into a book,
and you get an advance payment. But after that, you get a share of the
royalties. If the book sells well, then there will be additional earnings on the
book, and the individual authors will continue to make money for years
thereafter, and indeed they do on Universe, because it does sell pretty well. So
your chances of making money on your story are at least as good, I would say, in
the original anthologies as they are in the science fiction magazines. Aside
from that, there's also the fact that a lot of writers simply like to have their
work appear in book form, because they know it's going to be around to be read
longer than a magazine will be. It'll stay in better shape, and it'll be in
libraries and things like that.
The Best Science Fiction of the Year, which Carr began in 1972 with Donald
Wollheim, is a different sort of anthology. It consists of stories published in
science fiction magazines during the year. Carr reads all the magazines, then
selects those stories he considers to be the best. But he says that there are
certain problems that he has to solve when he actually starts putting the
stories together. I do want to be sure that there aren't too many stories that
are downbeat and depressing, because that's just not fun to read. They may be
good stories individually, but you just string them all end to end, and they can
actually seem not as good as they are. So I try to work on that kind of balance,
and I try to mix up the balance between longer stories and shorter stories,
because people do like variety in that. And if it should ever happen, for
instance, that I think the best 15 stories of the year, however many it takes,
are all time travel stories, for instance, I'm not going to publish a whole book
full of time travel stories. That's just silly. Again, people would get tired of
reading so many time travel stories in one book. So I try to mix up the themes,
too. Carr explains the particular needs an anthology fulfills. As best I know,
an anthology fills a need for people who want to read good science fiction short
stories, novelettes, novellas, whatever. People who want to read something other
than a novel. Probably people who want to have something that they can dip into
from time to time, rather than sitting down and reading the whole thing straight
through as they would a novel. There's a different psychology between reading
novels and short stories, and most people do prefer to read novels. They always
sell better than anthologies or single-author short story collections. But there
are people who like the short stories. I do, for instance. And they're the
people who buy these. On a reprint anthology, the attraction, I think, is that
these stories have been doubly screened. They're stories that were good enough
in the first place to sell to the magazine. And beyond that, they are the best
stories from the magazine. So the people who pick up an anthology can reasonably
expect that that is going to contain more good stories than the average issue of
a science fiction magazine. This isn't always true. There's very bad
anthologies, and there's very good issues in magazines. But far and large, that
is the case, I think. Terry Carr also writes fine science fiction. Next time,
we'll talk to him about some of his own writing.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. Among the science fiction anthologies that
Terry Carr has edited over the years are the so-called specialized anthologies.
These would be volumes of short stories with a particular theme uniting them.
For example, a book of short stories on robots or time travel. Carr has done
many special anthologies. We spoke with him about a few of them. He explains the
rationale behind his 1966 anthology, Science Fiction for People Who Hate Science
Fiction. That was my first anthology that I did under my own name and nobody
else's name. It was, I think, back to the second anthology I did right after the
first World's Best Science Fiction. And the idea on it was I wanted a book that
could be given to people who don't normally read science fiction, who think that
they wouldn't like it.
And I wanted, first, that the stories should be good stories. And second, that
the stories should be accessible to people who don't know the specialized
language of science fiction. There are a whole lot of assumptions that are just
automatic in science fiction and nobody bothers to explain them anymore. So
there are a lot of stories that are published these days that really require a
certain amount of background in reading science fiction in order to understand
them. I mean, nobody stops to explain what a star warp drive is anymore because
that gets a little bit tiresome after a while. We all know how a star warp drive
works, more or less, or at least we think we do. But to somebody who's never
heard of that before, that can be kind of confusing. Or the intricacies of all
the moralities of robot behavior or the strangeness of time paradoxes. Things
like that can be very confusing to someone first coming to science fiction. So
the stories that I chose for that book were stories that had very simple,
dramatic ideas that were very easy to understand to someone who was not used to
science fiction right away. But that were also very good stories. A more recent
anthology is one carded for the Sierra Club, entitled Dream's Edge, Science
Fiction Stories About the Planet Earth. The origin of that was that the Sierra
Club themselves decided they wanted to publish a science fiction anthology. And
they looked around for someone to do it, and they eventually landed on me. The
main problem I had with that book was that there were too many stories in it
that were downbeat and depressing. If you start writing about the ecology of
Earth, which is what the theme of that was,
well, everything's going wrong these days, as you know. And nobody really has
any answers about what we can do about it. So even though I think all the
stories in there are very good, there are only a few of them that hold out a
whole lot of hope. Most of them are about the problems and the ironies of
messing around with the environment and so on. In 1978, Carr put together an
anthology many people consider his finest. It's called Classic Science Fiction,
The First Golden Age. For this one, Carr chose stories from the years 1940 and
1942, a critical time in the development of modern science fiction. While Carr
selected stories, he did something else that makes the volume of particular
interest. But at the same time, I also did a lot of research on the writers, on
the editors, the publishing companies, the artists, and so forth. The conditions
under which they worked, how much money they were actually able to make. And I
wrote a great deal of introductory material, background material about the
writers and what they were doing, how they came to write each individual story.
And I think the anthology itself contains a number of just classic stories. It's
a basic anthology for anybody's science fiction library. But in addition to
that, that background material is fascinating. It tells a whole lot of things
about how things happened and why they happened. And it also tells a number of
pretty amusing stories about things that went on behind the scenes. I really
enjoyed doing the book. We'll have more with Terry Carr next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. Editor and author Terry Carr has published
three science fiction novels. The first two, Warlord of Kor and Invasion from
2500, go back to the early 1960s and are potboilers in the pulp tradition. But
his most recent novel is a different thing entirely. It's a tightly constructed
work with symbolic and allegorical depth. Entitled Cirque, it was published in
1977. Carr tells us where the idea for the book originated. Cirque is actually
the Bay Area. In some sense anyway, not literally. But the fact is that I live
in the hills of Oakland in the East Bay. And there's a drive along the ridge of
the hills. And I was up there one evening just at dusk. When the light is such
that the bay itself, which you can look down on, you'll see San Francisco and
Marin County across the bay, and San Jose to the south, and Berkeley and Oakland
in front of you, and a lot of water in the middle. But at a particular time of
evening, that water simply turned black. And I was up there looking at that, and
I thought, my God, you can't even tell at the bay. It looks like a gigantic hole
in the ground. And immediately I thought, what would a city be like if it would
build around a gigantic shaft into the earth like that? What effect might that
kind of physical environment have on the psychology of the people who lived in
that city?
Carr explores the psychology and destiny of various inhabitants of the city,
Cirque, during an unusual day's occurrences. On that day, some monsters rise out
of the abyss the city is built around. The monsters are huge and ominous, and
the reaction of Carr's characters to them forms the basis of the book. Near the
end of the novel, the monsters, after threatening the inhabitants of Cirque,
turn into flowers. This episode, along with many others in the book, suggests a
symbolic intent on Carr's part. We asked him if there was deliberate symbolism
in the book. Oh, yes, that is definitely deliberate. I knew the general outline
of the story. I just didn't know the specifics of who was going to do what at
which time and where they were going to be and so on. The symbolism is built
into the whole concept of the story. And I tried not to make that show too much
on the top. You know, I wanted the surface to be a story that was interesting in
and of itself, because I don't believe that symbolism itself should ever try to
carry a story. That bores me to tears. On the other hand, if you have a good
story up front, and beneath that story is symbolism, preferably emotional
symbolism, not just intellectual cuteness, I think that strengthens the story a
good deal.
Carr explains why he chose the title Cirque for the novel. The book, of course,
is about a city which is built around a gigantic chasm into the ground. And so
the city is named Cirque, which is French for circle, and has other connotations
too. It also, for instance, it's the French word for circus. And it was kind of
a circus. There were a whole lot of things, strange things going on at once in
the book. And the construction of the book is circular. It starts at dawn on one
day, and it goes ahead to finish at dawn the next day. And it finishes at the
same place in the city where it began, with the same characters there. So in all
those ways, Cirque or Circle was the perfect title for the book. The only thing
that really had going against it is that nobody knows how to pronounce it. We'll
have more from Terry Carr next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Carson. Science fiction author Terry Carr is noted
for his aliens. One of his better known creations is the mysterious millipede in
the novel Cirque. But he's also written a number of short stories with
fascinating aliens in them. "The Dance of the Changer and the Three" is one of
those stories. Carr provides an explanation of the premise behind the story. I
had been reading, of all people, Roger Zelazny. We seem to be mentioning him a
lot here. And Roger at that time, this was in the late 60s, was working a lot
with mythology in his science fiction. And I got interested in his work. I loved
his work. And I was always interested in mythology itself. And it occurred to me
that mythology tells a whole lot about the fears, the hopes, the beliefs of
humanity. And that indeed, if any alien creatures ever came to this planet and
wanted to find out something about what makes humanity tick, they could do far
worse than to study some of our myths. And I suddenly just, there was a little
click that goes on in your head. And I turned that around and said, well, I like
to think and write about aliens. And it's very difficult to write about an alien
from the inside, because I personally believe that aliens are inexplicable to
us. That we're never going to understand them fully. So I thought, possibly a
good way of dealing with the portrayal of an alien or an entire alien race would
be to do it circuitously by telling an alien myth. And that is exactly what "The
Dance of the Changer and the Three" is, of course, is an alien myth. And the myth
itself is supposed to tell you a lot about the psychology of the race.
We never do understand the psychology of the aliens in the story. The human
narrator describes certain actions and some of the dialogue of the aliens. But
the significance of all of this is never clear. The climax of the story occurs
when the aliens, who are creatures of pure energy, inexplicably destroy almost
all the humans on their planet. And they do it without malice, while they are
performing one of the ritual dances that belong to their mythology. We asked
Carr if there was perhaps some reason for this massacre, something we missed in
reading the story. I don't know, frankly. And I don't want to know. The method
that I used in writing that was since I believed the aliens would be totally un
-understandable to us, because every time the story that I was telling became
too comprehensible, I would write something that made no sense whatever. So that
the myth itself, of course, is kind of a self-canceling myth. If you actually
analyze it, there's a certain circularity to it. It has a dramatic coherence.
But it's not a story that we would ever tell about ourselves that would resonate
with the human psyche. And I wanted to end the story with something totally
inexplicable happening, just to underscore and emphasize the fact that these
creatures were aliens. And I wanted it to be something that none of us was going
to understand. And that meant, inevitably, that I had to be sure I didn't
understand it either. One of the points of the story, then, seems to be that
humans could never understand an alien species. We asked Carr if this
interpretation was correct. Yeah, that was the basic point. Yeah, I've been
trying to make that point in a number of my stories. There's another one that I
wrote earlier called Top Friends, which makes much the same point, but not quite
as dramatically as that does. Carr's premise in "The Dance of the Changer and the
Three" is an interesting one, very different from the common science fiction
notions of aliens as either hostile bug-eyed monsters or as creatures we can
become close to.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.